<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>Jupillon was constantly complaining that he was tired of working for others, that he could not set up for himself, that he could not find fifteen or eighteen hundred francs in his mother’s purse. He needed no more than that, he said, to hire a couple of rooms on the ground floor and set up as a glover in a small way. Indeed he was already dreaming of what he might do and laying out his plans: he would open a shop in the quarter, an excellent quarter for his business, as it was full of purchasers, and of makers of wretched gloves at five francs. He would soon add a line of perfumery and cravats to his gloves; and then, when he had made a tidy sum, he would sell out and take a fine shop on Rue de Richelieu.</p>
			<p>Whenever he mentioned the subject Germinie asked him innumerable questions. She wanted to know everything that was necessary to start in business. She made him tell her the names of the tools and appurtenances, give her an idea of their prices and where they could be bought. She questioned him as to his trade and the details of his work so inquisitively and persistently that Jupillon lost his patience at last and said to her:</p>
			<p>“What’s all this to you? The work sickens me enough now; don’t mention it to me!”</p>
			<p>One Sunday she walked toward Montmartre with him. Instead of taking Rue Frochot she turned into Rue Pigalle.</p>
			<p>“Why, this ain’t the way, is it?” said Jupillon.</p>
			<p>“I know what I’m about,” said she, “come on.”</p>
			<p>She had taken his arm, and she walked on, turning her head slightly away from him so that he could not see what was taking place on her face. Half way along Rue Fontaine Saint-Georges, she halted abruptly in front of two windows on the ground floor of a house, and said to him: “Look!”</p>
			<p>She was trembling with joy.</p>
			<p>Jupillon looked; he saw between the two windows, on a glistening copper plate:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Magasin de Ganterie. <span class="smcap">Jupillon.</span></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He saw white curtains at the first window. Through the glass in the other he saw pigeonholes and boxes, and, near the window, the little glover’s cutting board, with the great shears, the jar for clippings, and the knife to make holes in the skins in order to stretch them.</p>
			<p>“The concierge has your key,” she said.</p>
			<p>They entered the first room, the shop.</p>
			<p>She at once set about showing him everything. She opened the boxes and laughed. Then she pushed open the door into the other room. “There, you won’t be stifled there as you are in the loft at your mother’s. Do you like it? Oh! it isn’t handsome, but it’s clean. I’d have liked to give you mahogany. Do you like that little rug by the bed? And the paper⁠—I didn’t think of that⁠—” She put a receipt for the rent in his hand. “See! this is for six months. Dame! you must go to work right off and earn some money. The few sous I had laid by are all gone. Oh! let me sit down. You look so pleased⁠—it gives me a turn⁠—it makes my head spin. I haven’t any legs.”</p>
			<p>And she sank into a chair. Jupillon stooped over her to kiss her.</p>
			<p>“Ah! yes, they’re not there any longer,” she said, seeing that he was looking for her earrings. “They’ve gone like my rings. D’ye see, all gone⁠—”</p>
			<p>And she showed him her hands, bare of the paltry gems she had worked so long to buy.</p>
			<p>“They all went for the easy-chair, you see⁠—but it’s all horsehair.”</p>
			<p>As Jupillon stood in front of her with an embarrassed air, as if he were trying to find words with which to thank her, she continued:</p>
			<p>“Why, you’re a funny fellow. What’s the matter with you? Ah! it’s on that account, is it?” And she pointed to the bedroom. “You’re a stupid! I love you, don’t I? Well then?”</p>
			<p>Germinie said the words simply, as the heart says sublime things.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
