<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-52" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>LII</h2>
			<p>She would then ascend the stairs; that was her last place of refuge. She would fly from the rain and snow and cold, from fear, despair, and fatigue. She would go up and sit on the top step against Gautruche’s closed doors; she would draw her shawl and skirts closely about her in order to leave room for those who went and came up that long steep ladder, and would draw back as far as possible into the corner in order that her shame might fill but little space on the narrow landing.</p>
			<p>From the open doors the odor of unventilated closets, of families heaped together in a single room, the exhalations of unhealthy trades, the dense, greasy fumes of cooking done in chafing-dishes on the floor, the stench of rags and the faint damp smell of clothes drying in the house, came forth and filled the hall. The broken-paned window behind Germinie wafted to her nostrils the fetid stench of a leaden pipe in which the whole house emptied its refuse and its filth. Her stomach rose in revolt every moment at a puff of infection; she was obliged to take from her pocket a phial of melissa water that she always carried, and swallow a mouthful of it to avoid being ill.</p>
			<p>But the staircase had its passers, too: honest workmen’s wives went up with a bushel of charcoal, or a pint of wine for supper. Their feet would rub against her as they passed, and as they went farther up, Germinie would feel their scornful glances resting upon her and falling upon her with more crushing force at every floor. The children⁠—little girls in <i>fanchons</i> who flitted up the dark stairway and brightened it as if with flowers, little girls in whom she saw, as she so often saw in dreams, her own little one, living and grown to girlhood⁠—she saw them stop and look at her with wide open eyes that seemed to recoil from her; then the little creatures would turn and run breathlessly up-stairs, and, when they were well out of reach, would lean over the rail until they almost fell, and hurl impure jests at her, the insults of the children of the common people. Insulting words, poured out upon her by those rosebud mouths, wounded Germinie more deeply than all else. She would half rise for an instant; then, overwhelmed by shame, resigning herself to her fate, she would fall back into her corner, and, pulling her shawl over her head in order to bury herself therein out of sight, she would sit like a dead woman, crushed, inert, insensible, cowering over her own shadow, like a bundle tossed on the floor which everyone might tread upon⁠—having no control of her faculties, dead to everything except the footsteps that she was listening for⁠—and that did not come.</p>
			<p>At last, after long hours, hours that she could not count, she would fancy that she heard a stumbling walk in the street; then a vinous voice would mount the stairs, stammering “<i>Canaille!</i> <i>canaille</i> of a saloon-keeper!⁠—you sold me the kind of wine that goes to my head!”</p>
			<p>It was he.</p>
			<p>And almost every day the same scene was enacted.</p>
			<p>“Ah! there y’are, my Germinie,” he would say as his eyes fell upon her. “It’s like this⁠—I’ll tell you all about it. I’m a little bit under water.” And, as he put the key in the lock: “I’ll tell you all about it. It isn’t my fault.”</p>
			<p>He would enter the room, kick aside a turtle-dove with mangy wings that limped forward to greet him, and close the door. “It wasn’t me, d’ye see. It was Paillon, you know Paillon? that little round fellow, fat as a mad dog. Well, it was him, ’pon my honor. He insisted on paying for a sixteen-sous bottle for me. He offered to treat me, and I <i>proffered</i> him thanks. Thereupon we naturally <i>consoled</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> our coffee; when you’re consoled, you console! and as one thing led to another, we fell upon each other! There was a very devil of a carnage! The proof of it is that that gallows-bird of a saloon-keeper threw us out-o’-doors like lobster shells!”</p>
			<p>Germinie, during the explanation, would have lighted the candle, stuck in a yellow copper candlestick. By its flickering light the dirty paper on the walls could be seen, covered with caricatures from <i>Charivari</i>, torn from the paper and pasted on the wall.</p>
			<p>“Well, you’re a love!” Gautruche would exclaim, as he saw her place a cold fowl and two bottles of wine on the table. “For I must tell you all I’ve had in my stomach to-day⁠—a plate of wretched soup⁠—that’s all. Ah! it must have taken a stout master-at-arms to put that fellow’s eyes out!”</p>
			<p>And he would begin to eat. Germinie would sit with her elbows on the table, watching him and drinking, and her glance would grow dark.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Pshaw! all the négresses<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> are dead,” Gautruche would say at last, as he drained the bottles one by one. “Put the children to bed!”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Thereupon terrible, fierce, abhorrent outbursts of passion would ensue between those two strange creatures, savage ardor followed by savage satiety, frantic storms of lust, caresses that were impregnated with the fierce brutality of wine, kisses that seemed to seek the blood beneath the skin, like the tongue of a wild beast, and at the end, utter exhaustion that swallowed them up and left their bodies like corpses.</p>
			<p>Germinie plunged into these debauches with⁠—what shall I say?⁠—delirium, madness, desperation, a sort of supreme frenzy. Her ungovernable passions turned against themselves, and, going beyond their natural appetites, forced themselves to suffer. Satiety exhausted them without extinguishing them; and, overpassing the widest limits of excess, they excited themselves to self-torture. In the poor creature’s paroxysms of excitement, her brain, her nerves, the imagination of her maddened body, no longer sought pleasure in pleasure, but something sharper, keener, and more violent: pain in pleasure. And the words “to die” constantly escaped from her compressed lips, as if she were invoking death in an undertone and seeking to embrace it in the agonies of love.</p>
			<p>Sometimes, in the night, she would suddenly sit up on the edge of the bed, rest her bare feet on the cold floor, and remain there, wild-eyed, listening to the things that breathe in a sleeping-chamber. And little by little the obscurity of the place and hour seemed to envelop her. She seemed to herself to fall and writhe helplessly in the blind unconsciousness of the night. Her will became as naught. All sorts of black things, that seemed to have wings and voices, beat against her temples. The ghastly temptations that afford madness a vague glimpse of crime caused a red light, the flash of murder, to pass before her eyes, close at hand; and hands placed against her back pushed her toward the table where the knives lay. She would close her eyes and move one foot; then fear would lay hold of her and she would cling to the bedclothes; and at last she would turn around, fall back upon the bed, and go to sleep beside the man she had been tempted to murder; why? she had no idea; for nothing⁠—for the sake of killing!</p>
			<p>And so, until daybreak, in that wretched furnished lodging, the fierce struggle of those fatal passions would continue, while the poor maimed, limping dove, the infirm bird of Venus, nesting in one of Gautruche’s old shoes, would utter now and then, awakened by the noise, a frightened coo.</p>
			<hr/>
			<div class="caption">
				<i>Sometimes, in the night, she would suddenly sit up on the edge of the bed, rest her bare feet on the cold floor, and remain there, wild-eyed, listening to the things that breathe in a sleeping-chamber. The ghastly temptations that afford madness a vague glimpse of crime caused a red light, the flash of murder, to pass before her eyes, close at hand; and hands placed against her back pushed her toward the table where the knives lay.</i>
			</div>
			<hr/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
