<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>“There, mademoiselle!⁠—Look at me,” said Germinie.</p>
			<p>It was a few months later. She had asked her mistress’s permission to go that evening to the wedding ball of her grocer’s sister, who had chosen her for her maid-of-honor, and she had come to exhibit herself <i xml:lang="fr">en grande toilette</i>, in her low-necked muslin dress.</p>
			<p>Mademoiselle raised her eyes from the old volume, printed in large type, which she was reading, removed her spectacles, placed them in the book to mark her place, and exclaimed:</p>
			<p>“What, my little bigot, you at a ball! Do you know, my girl, this seems to me downright nonsense! You and the hornpipe! Faith, all you need now is to want to get married! A deuce of a want, that! But if you marry, I warn you that I won’t keep you⁠—mind that! I’ve no desire to wait on your brats! Come a little nearer⁠—⁠Oho! why⁠—⁠bless my soul! Mademoiselle Show-all! We’re getting to be a bit of a flirt lately, I find⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Why no, mademoiselle,” Germinie tried to say.</p>
			<p>“And then,” continued Mademoiselle de Varandeuil, following out her thought, “among you people, the men are such sweet creatures! They’ll spend all you have⁠—to say nothing of the blows. But marriage⁠—I am sure that that nonsensical idea of getting married buzzes around in your head when you see the others. That’s what gives you that simper, I’ll wager. <i xml:lang="fr">Bon Dieu de Dieu!</i> Now turn a bit, so that I can see you,” said Mademoiselle de Varandeuil, with an abrupt change of tone to one that was almost caressing; and placing her thin hands on the arms of her easy-chair, crossing her legs and moving her foot back and forth, she set about inspecting Germinie and her toilet.</p>
			<p>“What the devil!” said she, after a few moments of silent scrutiny, “what! is it really you?⁠⸺⁠Then I have never used my eyes to look at you.⁠—⁠Good God, yes!⁠⸺⁠But⁠—⁠but⁠—” She mumbled more vague exclamations between her teeth.⁠—“Where the deuce did you get that mug like an amorous cat’s?” she said at last, and continued to gaze at her.</p>
			<p>Germinie was ugly. Her hair, of so dark a chestnut that it seemed black, curled and twisted in unruly waves, in little stiff, rebellious locks, which escaped and stood up all over her head, despite the pomade upon her shiny bandeaux. Her smooth, narrow, swelling brow protruded above the shadow of the deep sockets in which her eyes were buried and sunken to such a depth as almost to denote disease; small, bright, sparkling eyes they were, made to seem smaller and brighter by a constant girlish twinkle that softened and lighted up their laughter. They were neither brown eyes nor blue eyes, but were of an undefinable, changing gray, a gray that was not a color, but a light! Emotion found expression therein in the flame of fever, pleasure in the flashing rays of a sort of intoxication, passion in phosphorescence. Her short, turned-up nose, with large, dilated, palpitating nostrils, was one of those noses of which the common people say that it rains inside: upon one side, at the corner of the eye was a thick, swollen blue vein. The square head of the Lorraine race was emphasized in her broad, high, prominent cheekbones, which were well-covered with the traces of smallpox. The most noticeable defect in her face was the too great distance between the nose and mouth. This lack of proportion gave an almost apish character to the lower part of the head, where the expansive mouth, with white teeth and full lips that looked as if they had been crushed, they were so flat, smiled at you with a strange, vaguely irritating smile.</p>
			<p>Her décolleté dress disclosed her neck, the upper part of her breast, her shoulders and her white back, presenting a striking contrast to her swarthy face. It was a lymphatic sort of whiteness, the whiteness, at once unhealthy and angelic, of flesh in which there is no life. She had let her arms fall by her sides⁠—round, smooth arms with a pretty dimple at the elbow. Her wrists were delicate; her hands, which did not betray the servant, were embellished with a lady’s fingernails. And lazily, with graceful sloth, she allowed her indolent figure to curve and sway;⁠—a figure that a garter might span, and that was made even more slender to the eye by the projection of the hips and the curve of the hoops that gave the balloon-like roundness to her skirt;⁠—an impossible waist, absurdly small but adorable, like everything in woman that offends one’s sense of proportion by its diminutiveness.</p>
			<p>From this ugly woman emanated a piquant, mysterious charm. Light and shadow, jostling and intercepting each other on her face on which hollows and protuberances abounded, imparted to it that suggestion of libertinism which the painter of love scenes gives to the rough sketch of his mistress. Everything about her⁠—her mouth, her eyes, her very plainness⁠—was instinct with allurement and solicitation. Her person exhaled an aphrodisiac charm, which challenged and laid fast hold of the other sex. It unloosed desire, and caused an electric shock. Sensual thoughts were naturally and involuntarily aroused by her, by her gestures, her gait, her slightest movement⁠—even by the air in which her body had left one of its undulations. Beside her, one felt as if he were near one of those disturbing, disquieting creatures, burning with the love disease and communicating it to others, whose face appears to man in his restless hours, torments his listless noonday thoughts, haunts his nights and trespasses upon his dreams.</p>
			<p>In the midst of Mademoiselle de Varandeuil’s scrutiny, Germinie stooped over her, and covered her hand with hurried kisses.</p>
			<p>“There⁠—there⁠—enough of that,” said Mademoiselle. “You would soon wear out the skin⁠—with your way of kissing. Come, run along, enjoy yourself, and try not to stay out too late. Don’t get all tired out.”</p>
			<p>Mademoiselle de Varandeuil was left alone. She placed her elbows on her knees, stared at the fire and stirred the burning wood with the tongs. Then, as she was accustomed to do when deeply preoccupied, she struck herself two or three sharp little blows on the neck with the flat of her hand, and thereby set her black cap all awry.</p>
			<hr/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
