<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p>Mademoiselle was sitting in her large armchair at the corner of the fireplace, where a few live embers were still sleeping under the ashes. Her black cap was pulled down over her wrinkled forehead almost to her eyes. Her black dress, cut in the shape of a child’s frock, was draped in scanty folds about her scanty body, showing the location of every bone, and fell straight from her knees to the floor. She wore a small black shawl crossed on her breast and tied behind her back, as they are worn by little girls. Her half-open hands were resting on her hips, with the palms turned outward⁠—thin, old woman’s hands, awkward and stiff, and swollen with gout at the knuckles and finger joints. Sitting in the huddled, crouching posture that compels old people to raise their heads to look at you and speak to you, she seemed to be buried in all that mass of black, whence nothing emerged but her face, to which preponderance of bile had imparted the yellow hue of old ivory, and the flashing glance of her brown eyes. One who saw her thus, her bright, sparkling eyes, the meagre body, the garb of poverty and the noble air with which she bore all the burdens of age, might well have fancied that he was looking at a fairy on the stage of the Petits-Ménages.</p>
			<p>Germinie was by her side. The old lady began:</p>
			<p>“The list is still under the door, eh, Germinie?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know, my girl,” Mademoiselle de Varandeuil resumed, after a pause, “do you know that when one is born in one of the finest houses on Rue Royale⁠—when one has been in a fair way to own the Grand and Petit-Charolais⁠—when one has almost had the Château of Clichy-la-Garenne for a country house⁠—and when it took two servants to carry the silver platter on which the joint was served at your grandmother’s⁠—do you know that it takes no small amount of philosophy”⁠—and mademoiselle with difficulty raised a hand to her shoulder⁠—“to see yourself end like this, in this devilish nest of rheumatism, where, in spite of all the list in the world, you can’t keep out of draughts.⁠—That’s it, stir up the fire a little.”</p>
			<p>She put out her feet toward Germinie, who was kneeling in front of the fireplace, and laughingly placed them under her nose: “Do you know that that takes no small amount of philosophy⁠—to wear stockings out at heel! Simpleton! I’m not scolding you; I know well enough that you can’t do everything. So you might as well have a woman come to do the mending. That’s not very much to do. Why don’t you speak to that little girl that came here last year? She had a face that I remember.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! she’s black as a mole, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>“Bah! I knew it. In the first place you never think well of anybody. That isn’t true, you say? Why, wasn’t she a niece of Mère Jupillon’s? We might take her for one or two days a week.”</p>
			<p>“That hussy shall never set foot here.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, more fables! You’re a most astonishing creature, to adore people and then not want to see them again. What has she done to you?”</p>
			<p>“She’s a lost creature, I tell you!”</p>
			<p>“Bah! what does my linen care for that?”</p>
			<p>“But, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>“All right! find me someone else then. I don’t care about her particularly. But find me someone.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! the women that come in like that don’t do any work. I’ll mend your clothes. You don’t need anyone.”</p>
			<p>“You!⁠—Oh! if we have to rely on your needle!” said mademoiselle jocosely; “and then, will Mère Jupillon ever give you the time?”</p>
			<p>“Madame Jupillon? Oh! for all the dust I shall ever leave in her house again!”</p>
			<p>“Hoity-toity! What’s that? She too! so she’s on your black books, is she? Oho! hurry up and make another acquaintance, or else, <i xml:lang="fr">bon Dieu de Dieu</i>! we shall have some bad days here!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
